All right.
So here's our two point charges here we have a positive and a negative.
What I'm gonna do here is I'm actually going to trace it along over here.
So this is going to be a positive x axis.
I'll place a positive charge over here right here and I'll place a negative charge a certain distance
away.
Let's try to keep it roughly the same.
Again both of these the charges down here you could see there are each one of them is one nano Coolum
one positive and one is negative.
So let's first look at the area in between and it doesn't matter which point I take.
Let's imagine I take a point that is right on the center line over here between the two charges.
So let me draw another set of axes.
Another axis the y axis and then you place a point right here at the center.
OK.
Now I want to do is remember the field produced by each one of those is given by our equation because
they are both point charges.
It's k q over R squared.
Yeah one thing you should see from this line over here if this is the y axis and this is exactly at
the midpoint between the two.
I imagine you call this distance x.
You also call this distance x you could see right away that the distance between the two charges in
this point is going to be the same distance.
I don't know what you want to call it let's call it R and call it r right.
And this is the point P where I want to evaluate the field you can see it's going to be the same.
OK.
So now what would you do.
Well if I wanted to plot what does the total field look like right here.
Again maybe start with the positive point charge the positive point charge produces an electric field
that looks like this.
The magnitude of that field is going to be k q over our squared.
All right.
How about the field produced by the negative point charge the field produced by the negative point charge
is going to be a vector that points toward the negative charge and its magnitude is going to be the
same.
All right let me just go ahead and I'm got to save some room over here.
I'm going to drag it all the way down here k q over our squared notice that the magnitude of each one
is the same.
Let me write that down.
Magnitude
is the same.
All right.
So now what we have to do is we really want to find what the total electric field looks like.
So what you have to do is you have to add those up as vectors.
So at the end what we're really interested in is the total field as a vector.
So this here has to be equal to the field number one is a vector plus the field produced by the negative
charge as a vector.
OK.
Call this E two.
All right.
So how would we add these as vector as well again I could just take the first vector and then I have
to add the second one to it the second one is this guy right here.
All you do is you simply take this vector and you translate it and now the resulting vector is going
to be this one.
This is the total electric field.
At least the direction the magnitude we'd have to do a little bit of math in order to find that and
I'll do that in just a few minutes.
OK.
But this is how you would find the direction so you could go back now and look at my diagram here which
shows you the direction the electric feel that every point you could see that at any point here along
the center the field is always pointing toward the right.
It doesn't matter which point you take because it doesn't matter if I move my point p up above over
here.
These vectors are always going to have the same length.
All right let's try a different point let's try a point like right over here.
So over here we're gonna have two electric fields right there is the field produced by the positive
one and the field produced by the negative on the field from the positive one points away.
So let me go ahead and draw.
Let me try to straighten that out.
Draw a vector over here that looks like this.
This would be the vector produced by the or the fourth the field produced by this positive charge.
All right.
In the distance I would use in this case and go ahead and kind of just delete this for now.
Clean it up.
The distance that I would be interested in here would be this one.
This would be the distance that I would use here for this particular position.
So this would be my AR and I'm going to call it our positive because now they're not going to be the
same because you could see the distance from the negative charge all the way to this point p is pretty
far all right.
So how would I go ahead now and draw the vector produced by the negative charge at this point.
Again I would probably draw like this.
And now look what I'm doing over here right.
This is the vector the electric field vector produced by the negative charge.
What do you see what I did over here.
Notice how short that vector is and that vector is going to be shorter because well think about the
distance we're gonna have now the distance we're going to be using for this particular case is going
to be this distance right here.
It's going to go from here all the way to here.
This will be the distance are minus.
So again the total field is still the vector sum however.
Okay.
Since the blue vector is shorter than the red one the total electric field at the end should look something
like this.
You notice it is still a vector that points away from the positive.
So if I go back to my diagram you could see on this side the vector still points away from the positive.
But it's going to be small.
All right then if you go on the other side for example the other side I could place a point P over here.
Here you're going to have the exact opposite.
Right.
We have the field produced by the negative charge which is going to be a larger vector because it's
closer to the negative charge.
And then we also have the field produced by the positive charge in this case.
This is gonna be the shortest one.
So I've got the ones in twos mixed up over here.
Let me just write it like this and this is the field produced by the positive charge.
So again when you add both of these vectors up what you end up doing here is you're going to get a total
vector like this.
This is gonna be the total vector at least the direction you can see that from the diagram.
When I'm on the right of this negative charge I have all the vectors pointing toward it.
Now if you want to take any other direction you can.
You could take this one for example ohm or you could take out of this one for example.
Let's take this one since I have less things on my diagram over here.
So I want to clean up some some things over here give myself some space.
So how would it look like at any general point down here.
Well let me take this one for example.
So I have a positive charge that produces an electric field that points away from it.
Notice I'm pretty close to this positive charge so I'm going to draw kind of a long vector.
And then what else do I have.
I have a negative charge which produces a vector.
Now you've got an imaginary line that joins the negative charge to the point.
And I'm gonna make that vector shorter.
So it's going to look something like this.
So I and what you have to do is you have to add those up as.
So you do e one or the red vector plus the blue vector.
So what I'm going to do is I'm just going to move the blue vector down over here because I want to add
them up and the total electric field at this point.
Now if I didn't do it to right should look something like this it's a little bit on an angle over here
again I'm just kind of guessing the magnitudes but if I guess wrong you could see I get it right.
But over in general it's kind of pointing down and the angle will kind of depend here.
Right.
It kind of depends on how you've drawn those vectors.
See if I'm just far enough it's going to point a little bit that side if I'm just closer on this side
it points a little bit here.
OK.
But in this case the way I drew them this would be my total electric field.
We're going to take a numerical example in just a minute.
But just getting in a general idea of why you get this field map.
You just have to use the superposition adding the vectors the electric fields produced by each charge.